288 - 07 288 - . 07 Volume 288 - No. 07

2022 10

2022 10,

Thursday, 10th February, 2022

()

()

PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES

(HANSARD)

OFFICIAL REPORT

( / /Uncorrected)

: :

:

ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS PERSONAL EXPLANATION BY HON. THISAKUTTI

ARACHCHI PREVENTION OF TERRORISM (TEMPORARY PROVISIONS) (AMENDMENT) BILL: Read the First time CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT)

BILL: Read a Second, and the Third time, and passed as amended PROHIBITION OF ANTI-PERSONNEL MINES BILL: Read a Second, and the Third time, and passed as

amended

PRINCIPAL CONTENTS

( ) () :

.

() : ,

.

: ,

.

:

:

: . :

() : ,

.

()

: ,

.

( )

() : ,

.

:

JUDICATURE (AMENDMENT) BILL: Read a Second, and the Third time, and passed CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL: Read a Second, and the Third time, and passed PROVINCIAL COUNCILS (TRANSFER OF STAMP

DUTY) (AMENDMENT) BILL: Read a Second, and the Third time, and passed ADJOURNMENT QUESTIONS ADJOURNMENT MOTION: A Parliamentary Select Committee to Look Into Issues

of Prisons and Detainees

PARLIAMENT -

2022 10

2022 10,

Thursday, 10th February, 2022

. . 10.00 . [ ]

. .. 10.00 . [ ]

. The Parliament met at 10.00 a.m., MR. SPEAKER [THE HON. MAHINDA YAPA

ABEYWARDANA] in the Chair.

PAPERS PRESENTED

( - ) (The Hon. Johnston Fernando - Minister of Highways and Chief Government Whip) , , ( ) 2018 - .

.

. . Question put, and agreed to.

( ) (The Hon. Johnston Fernando) , 2019 .

.

. . Question put, and agreed to. ( ) (The Hon. Johnston Fernando) , 2019 .

.

. . Question put, and agreed to. ( ) (The Hon. Johnston Fernando) , , 201 .

, .

. . Question put, and agreed to.

( ) (The Hon. Johnston Fernando) , 2019 .

.

. . Question put, and agreed to.

2020 ,- [ ,

. . Ordered to lie upon the Table.

PETITIONS ( ( ) - ) (The Hon. (Dr.) Ramesh Pathirana - Minister of Plantation) , .

(1) , , , 71 ;

(2) , , , 125/4 . .

721 722

( - , ) (The Hon. Dayasiri Jayasekara - State Minister of Batik, Handloom and Local Apparel Products) , , , , 12 .. .

( () ) (The Hon. (Mrs.) Rohini Kumari Wijerathna) , , , 12/30 . .

( ) (The Hon. Amarakeerthi Athukorala) , , , .. .

( () ) (The Hon. (Mrs.) Kokila Gunawardene) , , , 17/1 .. .

.

.

Petitions ordered to be referred to the Committee on Public Petitions.

ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

( ) (The Hon. Speaker) 1 -3/2022- (1), .

( ) (The Hon. Gayantha Karunatilleka) , . ( ) (The Hon. Johnston Fernando) , .

. . Question ordered to stand down.

( ) (The Hon. Speaker) 2 -32/2022- (1), .

( ) (The Hon. Buddhika Pathirana) , .

( ) (The Hon. Johnston Fernando) , .

. . Question ordered to stand down. :

:

SRI LANKA INVENTORS' COMMISSION: BUILDING RENTED

245/2022 3.

( ) (The Hon. Hesha Withanage) - (1):

() (i) ;

(ii) , ;

(iii) ;

(iv) ;

? () , ?

: () (i) ; (ii) , ; (iii) ; (iv) ;

? () , ?

723 724

2022 10

asked the Minister of Education:

(a) Will he inform this House -

(i) whether a building in the Battaramulla area has been obtained on rent basis for the Sri Lanka Inventors Commission;

(ii) if so, the name of the said building and the name of the proprietor;

(iii) separately, the monthly and annual rent paid for the aforesaid building; and

(iv) whether the intended objectives of renting a building to the Commission at a high cost been achieved?

(b) If not, why?

( ( ) () - , , ) (The Hon. (Dr.) (Mrs.) Seetha Arambepola - State Minister of Skills Development, Vocational Education, Research and Innovation) , .

() (i) .

(ii) .

(iii) .

(iv) .

()

.

( ) (The Hon. Speaker) 4 -566/2022- (1), . ( ) (The Hon. Chaminda Wijesiri) , . ( - ) (The Hon. Dinesh Gunawardena - Minister of Education and the Leader of the House of Parliament) , .

( ) (The Hon. Chaminda Wijesiri) , . . , . , . , . . . . , . . . . , . , , .

. . Question ordered to stand down. ( ) (The Hon. Speaker) 5 -1019/2022- (1), . ( ) (The Hon. Shantha Bandara) , . ( ) (The Hon. Johnston Fernando) , .

. . Question ordered to stand down. ( ) (The Hon. Speaker) 6 -1175/2022- (1), - [ .

: :

SMALL HYDROPOWER PLANTS: POWER GENERATION

1188/2022 7.

( ) (The Hon. Nalin Bandara Jayamaha) - (1):

() (i) ;

725 726

(ii) ;

(iii) ; ?

()

?

() , ?

:

() (i) ;

(ii) ;

(iii) ;

?

() ?

() , ?

asked the Minister of Power:

(a) Will he inform this House -

(i) the number of small hydropower plants from which Ceylon Electricity Board purchases electricity;

(ii) their capacity; and

(iii) the price per unit generated by small hydropower plants?

(b) Will he also inform this House whether granting of approval to small power plants has been stopped by now?

(c) If not, why?

( - , ) (The Hon. Duminda Dissanayake -State Minister of Solar Power, Wind and Hydro Power Generation Projects Development) , .

() (i) 214

(ii) 424.336.

(iii) 2020 (KWh) 15.1

2021 (KWh) 15.31

() 19.63

1 (Energy Permit) . , .

()

.

( ) (The Hon. Nalin Bandara Jayamaha) , . .

, , 2015 . , . , . , - rooftop solar panels - .

. 2015 . , . , . , ?

( ) (The Hon. Duminda Dissanayake) , . . , .

( ) (The Hon. Nalin Bandara Jayamaha) . . .

( ) (The Hon. Duminda Dissanayake) , .

727 728

[

2022 10

. , ; . , . , .

( ) (The Hon. Nalin Bandara Jayamaha) , . , . , . . , . , . [ , - [ ? . [ . [ , .

( ) (The Hon. Speaker) , . ( ) (The Hon. Nalin Bandara Jayamaha) , .

[ .] [ ] [Expunged on the order of the Chair.]

. [

( ) (The Hon. Speaker) .[ ( ) (The Hon. Nalin Bandara Jayamaha) . .

( ) (The Hon. Speaker) . ( ) (The Hon. Nalin Bandara Jayamaha) , . - single-phase supply , three-phase supply , bulk supply - . ,

. , , , - , , - . , . ? ? , . , supply . . , . .

( ) (The Hon. Duminda Dissanayake) , . , . , , . . , . , , . , , . 750 electricity connections . , , , , , .

, . , , . , . , . . , .

( ) (The Hon. Nalin Bandara Jayamaha) , . .

729 730

( ) (The Hon. Duminda Dissanayake) , . .

( ) (The Hon. Nalin Bandara Jayamaha) . , .

:

:

AYURVEDIC MEDICAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE: RESEARCHES

CONDUCTED

1308/2022 8.

( ) (The Hon. Mohamad Muzammil) - (1):

() (i) ;

(ii) 2016 2020 ;

(iii) ;

?

() , ?

:

() (i) ; (ii) 2016 2020 ; (iii) ;

?

() , ?

asked the Minister of Health: (a) Will he inform this House - (i) whether an Ayurvedic Medical Research Institute has been established in Sri Lanka; (ii) the number of researches conducted by the aforesaid Institute from the year 2016 to 2020; and (iii) the new products introduced through the aforementioned researches?

(b) If not, why?

( - , ) (The Hon. Sisira Jayakody - State Minister of Indigenous Medicine Promotion, Rural and Ayurvedic Hospitals Development and Community Health) , .

() (i) .

.

(ii) 2016 2020 03.

(iii) .

() .

( ) (The Hon. Mohamad Muzammil) , ?

( ) (The Hon. Sisira Jayakody) 2016 2020 .

( ) (The Hon. Mohamad Muzammil) , ? , .

, . - 19 , . , , , . , . . . , , . , . ? , , 2016 2020 , . ? , .

731 732

2022 10

. .

( ) (The Hon. Sisira Jayakody) , 14 . , . . , 3 . , . , . , . , . , . . , .

( ) (The Hon. Mohamad Muzammil) , .

, 35 . 300 . , . . , . , . , , . , call . . , . , ?

( ) (The Hon. Sisira Jayakody) , 00 . 30 . , D.A. , , , . , .

, . , . . , . , . . , . . .

:

: SHOPS CONSTRUCTED BY THALAWA PRADESHIYA SABHA:

DISTRIBUTION

1466/2022 9.

( ) (The Hon. Rohana Bandara) , - (1):

() (i) 2015 ;

(ii) ;

(iii) ;

?

() , ?

733 734

, :

() (i) 2015

;

(ii) ;

(iii) ;

?

() , ? asked the Minister of Public Services, Provincial Councils and Local Government:

(a) Will he inform this House -

(i) the number of shops that have been

constructed by the Thalawa Pradeshiya Sabha from the year 2015 to date;

(ii) the number of shops that have not been

distributed so far, out of the aforesaid shops; and

(iii) the steps that will be taken by the Ministry

to expeditiously distribute the shops that have not been distributed so far?

(b) If not, why?

( ) (The Hon. Johnston Fernando) , , .

() (i) .

- 20

- 08

2015 - 28

(ii) 02.

- 01

- 01

- 02

(iii) , 2022.01.1 : 20 . .

() .

( ) (The Hon. Rohana Bandara) , ?

( ) (The Hon. Johnston Fernando) , .

( ) (The Hon. Rohana Bandara) , . , . . , . , . , , ? , ? Retender ,?

( ) (The Hon. Johnston Fernando) , ; . . . , . , . . , .

( ) (The Hon. Rohana Bandara) , . . . . . ,

735 736

[

2022 10

. , . .

. . , ?

( ) (The Hon. Johnston Fernando) , . . , . . , .. , . , . . . , . . , . , . , . , .

( ) (The Hon. Speaker) 10 -1726/2022- (1), .

( ) (The Hon. Kins Nelson) , . ( ) (The Hon. Johnston Fernando) , .

. . Question ordered to stand down.

( ) (The Hon. Speaker) .

6 -1175/2022- (1), .

( ) (The Hon. Jagath Kumara Sumithraarachchi) , .

( - , , , , ) (The Hon. Shehan Semasinghe - State Minister of Samurdhi, Household Economy, Micro Finance, Self-employment and Business Development) , .

. . Question ordered to stand down.

( ) (The Hon. Speaker) , .

PERSONAL EXPLANATION BY HON. THISAKUTTI

ARACHCHI

( ) (The Hon. Thisakutti Arachchi) , .

2022.02.09 , , . 1972 5 1994 .

, , 2002

737 738

, . 10 - . 10 .- 130 - 171 . .- , 5 20 - .- , , , , .

, , , , . , 2002 , - .- . , , , .

, , . . . , . . "" . .. , , .. , . .

( ) (The Hon. Speaker) , .

( ) (The Hon. Thisakutti Arachchi) , .

. - , - , - . , , , .

. ( ) (The Hon. Chaminda Wijesiri) , - ( ) (The Hon. Speaker) , . , . [

( ) (The Hon. Chaminda Wijesiri) . . [ . [

( ) (The Hon. Speaker) . [ . [ . .

( ) (The Hon. Chaminda Wijesiri) , . .

( ) (The Hon. Speaker) ? ( ) (The Hon. Chaminda Wijesiri) . , , . "" . , . . , , . , . UP-4008 Double Cab , . UP-4008 Double Cab . , . [

739 740

[

2022 10

( ) (The Hon. Speaker) . [ ( ) (The Hon. Chaminda Wijesiri) , . ( ) (The Hon. Speaker) Personal Explanation . , .

, .

BILLS PRESENTED

( )

() PREVENTION OF TERRORISM (TEMPORARY PROVISIONS)

(AMENDMENT) BILL

"1979 4 ( )

." ... .

2022 22 .

() .. .

2022 22, .

Presented by the Hon. (Prof.) G.L. Peiris, Minister of Foreign; to be read a Second time upon Tuesday, 22nd February, 2022 and to be printed.

( ) (The Hon. Rauff Hakeem) Hon. Speaker, I have one question for the Hon. Minister.

( ) (The Hon. Speaker) Yes, Hon. Rauff Hakeem? ( ) (The Hon. Rauff Hakeem) Todays newspapers report the Joint Statement issued by both Sri Lanka and the EU after the Joint Commission

Meeting, according to which certain shortcomings in the amendments to the PTA have been pointed out by the EU and an undertaking has been given by the Government that those amendments will be considered. Are you considering those amendments, Hon. Minister?

.. ( .. ) (The Hon. M.A. Sumanthiran) Sir, may I also ask a question?

... ( () .. - ) (The Hon. (Prof.) G.L. Peiris - Minister of Foreign) Hon. Speaker, we are not debating it now.

( ) (The Hon. Speaker) Normally, that is not done. The Hon. Minister only presented the Bill. You can take part in the debate. There is no difficulty in doing that.

... ( () .. ) (The Hon. (Prof.) G.L. Peiris) Sir, we are not debating the Bill here now. I only presented the Bill. - [Interruption.]

( ) (The Hon. Speaker) Yes. So, you all can take part in the debate. .. ( .. ) (The Hon. M.A. Sumanthiran) It is not to debate, Sir, I just want a clarification from the Minister, if he allows me.

... ( () .. ) (The Hon. (Prof.) G.L. Peiris) It is okay. .. ( .. ) (The Hon. M.A. Sumanthiran) The Minister of Justice has stated - it is in the press today - that the PTA would be totally repealed and another Counter Terrorism Act will be introduced. So, that is why I want to ask the Hon. Minister of Foreign why he is presenting this slipshod Amendment to Parliament?

... ( () .. ) (The Hon. (Prof.) G.L. Peiris) All these criticisms can be made on the Floor of Parliament when this Bill is debated.

( ) (The Hon. Speaker) That is right

741 742

... ( () .. ) (The Hon. (Prof.) G.L. Peiris) It has been presented in keeping with the Standing Orders of Parliament. Any citizen of this country can challenge it in the Supreme Court. We have to await the Determination of the Supreme Court. Thereafter, there will be a full debate here in Parliament and that is the proper occasion for any views for and against the Amendments to be expressed in Parliament, Sir. That is the proper procedure and the Government wishes to adhere to the proper procedure.

( ) (The Hon. Speaker) Thank you. ( ) (The Hon. Ranil Wickremasinghe) , .

14 . . , . . , 121(2) () . , . , . . , , swaps, credit lines . , . , , . . . , . .

, . . , IMF . . . . . , . .

( ) (The Hon. Dinesh Gunawardena) ,

, . . . Section 4 . , . , Mid-Year Financial Report . mid-year PAC .

The PAC cannot report back to Parliament. Then, there will have to be some other provision to discuss about foreign exchange, the balance of payments et cetera. But, it is an issue. The Opposition has the right to raise any matter and the Government Ministers will reply to it. You all can move Adjournment Motions and debate, where all these matters can be discussed. That is why we give Adjournment Debates whenever the Opposition wants to.

( ) (The Hon. Ranil Wickremasinghe) I am referring to Standing Order No. 121. ( ) (The Hon. Dinesh Gunawardena) The Mid-year Financial Report comes to Parliament. There is a certin provision on which every Government has to act. If you want it amended, then it is another approach that we will have to take. - [Interruption] It can be raised at the Consultative Committee Meeting. Anyway, I will discuss with the Minister of Finance.

BUSINESS OF THE PARLIAMENT ( ) (The Hon. Dinesh Gunawardena) , :

" 1 5 2022 19 ."

. . Question put, and agreed to.

( ) (The Hon. Speaker) , .

743 744

2022 10

() CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT)

BILL [ 0]]

" " [ .. . ]

.

. - [ 09]

" ." - [ ... ]

. Order read for resuming Adjourned Debate on Question - [09th February]

"That the Bill be now read a Second time".- [ The Hon. M.U.M. Ali Sabry]

Question again proposed.

[10.42 a.m.] ( - ) (The Hon. Sajith Premadasa -Leader of the Opposition) Hon. Speaker, as I stand here today to participate in the Debate, it is with great sadness and disappointment that I express sentiments, especially with regard to the prevailing situation in our country. Sir, it is extremely disheartening to note that the incompetent, power-hungry, stubborn and inflexible administration of this governing elite has led to country-wide depression in all its facets. Sir, when we look into the eyes of the Sri Lankan people, what we see is desperation, darkness, destitution and loss of hope. There is deep-seated resentment among the people of our country especially with regard to the present system of governance and its consequences and repercussions. A mass-scale exodus of youth and members of the intelligentsia is taking place, which is known as brain drain or an outflow of talent from our country, and this administration has absolutely no idea as to how to counter that situation.

Sir, today, in all aspects of our country, divisiveness is prevailing. We are a country divided: we are divided on ethnicity; we are divided on religion; we are divided on castes; we are divided on creed; we are divided on social status and we are divided on economic status. So, a mass-scale division is prevailing in our motherland. Racism, discrimination, prejudice and marginalization have become the basic norm of governmental activity. This has had a negative impact on social harmony, togetherness and brotherhood.

Today, in our motherland, hyperinflation is prevailing. This has caused a tremendous harm to people of all walks of life. More and more, our people are entering the

vicious poverty cycle. Democratic values and institutions continue to be under stress and government activities continue to focus on destroying these noble institutions.

Sir, today, we have in our country kleptocracy, which is functioning to achieve personal enrichment. Authoritarianism, nepotism and despotism are destroying the very basic values of our society, the values that we stand for. Political bigotry, thuggerism, vulgarism, arbitrary actions have gained primacy over decent political discourse. Today, these nefarious instruments have become the main weapon of government policy. Sir, this is ruining our country, this is destroying the very fabric of our society. Livelihoods of farming communities have been destroyed due to primacy given to myth over science. Look at the various sectors of our society: the self-employed, the daily-waged, the youth, workers who are working in factories, women-headed households, the disabled and the so-called silent majority. They are suffering in the hands of this Governments incompetence and inefficiency in governance.

Sir, this country is suffering from triple deficits. The Government has absolutely no coherent policy, vision or strategy to cater to resolve the situation. The Government lacks proper understanding of economic principles and economic policy. Today, we have a situation where the Government has embarked on a very arbitrary and a draconian action of taxing the Employees' Provident Fund of the working class of our country. A 25 per cent tax is going to be imposed in order to cater to the shortfalls in government revenue. May I remind this noble House that it is due to the very first step of this administration right at the inception, providing 600 to 800 billion rupees of tax cuts and tax rebates. That has led us to this economic misery of our country.

Sir, amidst this darkness, there is hope, hope which is based on unity, steadfastness, resolve, clarity and a progressives visionary approach, an approach based on substance, fact, truth, statistics and science. There are proven success stories throughout the world of countries which were faced with these same obstacles, these same challenges and which had overcome them. They have been victorious and certainly, Sir, as a country, we also can follow suit. We also can unite under a progressive banner, adopting a modern approach, an out-of-the-box approach and an approach which provides policy resultants, policy prescriptions to the dangerous challenges that our motherland faces.

My fellow countrymen, time has arrived for all of us to unite, to stand up to make righteousness victorious. We have to defy and beat up dynastic politics, we have to negate aristocracy and bring in meritocracy, a merit-based approach to governance. We have to stand up against the attempt to establish a police State; continuing steps that are aimed at militarization of our society must be opposed. It has to be opposed by the democratic silent majority of our country.

We have to fight for our rights; we have to fight for our peoples rights. We have to ensure a free, happy,

745 746

democratic and prosperous life for our countrymen. Sir, can it be done? Can it be achieved? Sure, it can be done. Yes, of course, we can achieve it.

However, Sir, we cannot achieve these noble objectives and goals by mere statements, interviews, seminars and publishing of booklets. We have to walk the talk; we have to ensure that our declarations and our visionary statements are translated and transformed into action policy. Declaratory policy alone would not suffice. Therefore, Sir, at this critical juncture in our countrys democratic political history, we have to unite, unite with a purpose. We have to be resolute; we have to be focused. We have to ensure that the deteriorating country situation is paused; we have to put a stop to this deteriorating situation.

We only have reserves to finance three weeks imports. Is the Government not aware of it? Why is the Government oblivious to this reality? That is because due to majoritarianism that persists in the Government circles, they feel extremely comfortable in their cushy and plush lives at the expense of taxpayers funds. People in our motherland are suffering: they do not have an adequate income to fulfil the family needs, the nutritional needs of mothers and children. Youth are joining the unemployment line on a minute-by-minute basis, factories are facing imminent closure, the exports are dwindling and no one has a proper prescription to the foreign reserve issue.

Sir, at this juncture, we are proud to say that the Samagi Jana Balawegaya and our economic team consisting of pre-eminent economists and many who walk the talk, especially our three distinguished Members of Parliament, the Hon. Kabir Hashim, the Hon. (Dr.) Harsha de Silva and the Hon. Eran Wickramaratne, are in the process of formulating a constructive, progressive solution to the major problems that we are facing. We are discussing with domestic and international experts with regard to restructuring of country debt. We are speaking with partners and friends to ensure that we resolve the financial crisis through the participation of international political institutions and monetary institutions, of course, without imposing austerity on the common masses of our motherland. We will, in no way, support any attempt or any step to bring hardship on the people of our country, who are already in dire straits due to the maladministration and malpractices of this corrupt administration.

Lastly, let me appeal once again to all those who can contribute, all those who matter and all those who can play a progressive and constructive role in rejuvenating and strengthening our motherland to formulate a united approach to face up to the major challenges in economic, social and other spheres. Let us unite. We have hope and let everyone have hope and let us be the lightning rod for the vast majority who are in darkness.

I thank you.

[.. 10.59 ( - ) (The Hon. Rohitha Abegunawardhana - Minister of Ports and Shipping) , ( ) ; . . , . , , . .

, . . , , . , , , , 30, 35 . , ; , .

, . . , . .

, 2017 ... . . , . , , , , , , . , , , . ,

747 748

[

2022 10

. . , .

- - . . ; . , . . . . , ; . ... .

. , . . .

, , , , , . ? ? , , . , ? ? - .- . , . ? ? ? ? , , . ? ? ? ? ? , , , , , . ? ? .

. , . . . , . .

, . , , , , . , " ?" . ? ? . . , . . , . 225 , . , . , . , . . , .

, . , . . , . . , . ? , "" , "" , . ! . , . , "! " . , .

. 24 . , 24 . , , ? ? , . . .

, ! . . . . , .

749 750

. , ? , , , " " . . , " ! , . " . . , ? , "! " , ?

. ( . ) (The Hon. Premnath C. Dolawatte) Permit . ( ) (The Hon. Rohitha Abegunawardhana) Permit . 5 permit . , 6 permit . , permits . Permits ,- [

( ) (The Hon. Gayantha Karunatilleka) ? ( ) (The Hon. Rohitha Abegunawardhana) , ! ( ) (The Hon. Gayantha Karunatilleka) . ( ) (The Hon. Rohitha Abegunawardhana) ? . , . permit . 6 . 5 . 5 . , . ! . , " . " .

. , . , ? . . . , . . . , ? . . , . ? ? ? . . . , .

, , . , , - - . . . ! . , , . . , , " " . , .

( ) (The Hon. Speaker) . ( ) (The Hon. Rohitha Abegunawardhana) , .

. . , . , . . . . , . , " " . , . , ;

751 752

[

2022 10

; . , . , . , . . , .

, . . . . . . . ? , , ? 1,600,000 . 1,600,000 , " " ? 1,600,000 ? ? , . , . , , . . . , . , , . .

, . 20 . , . ? , 20 3, 4 . . . . . . . , , .

, . . , .

, , , . , , . , . , . . , ; . , .

, . . . . . . ? , , , . . , 10.30 . 10.30 . , . . , telephone ; telephone ring . Telephone ring ; . answer , 14 . , . . , . " " , , .

( ) (The Hon. Lakshman Kiriella) , . , . . ILO , .

753 754

, . , . . . .

( ) (The Hon. Speaker) , .

Next, the Hon. M.A. Sumanthiran. ( ) (The Hon. Rohitha Abegunawardhana) ,-

( ) (The Hon. Speaker) , why do you want to get involved in this? ( ) (The Hon. Rohitha Abegunawardhana) , . , . . , . , ? , , , ? .

( ) (The Hon. Speaker) Hon. Sumanthiran, you may speak now.

[11.23 a.m.] .. ( .. ) (The Hon. M.A. Sumanthiran) Thank you, Hon. Speaker, for the opportunity to participate in this Debate.

We are debating these Amendments, which had been tabled yesterday, for two days. The importance of these Amendments cannot be underscored more than that. But, I am saddened to see that at an important Debate such as this, the entire front row of the Government benches is

vacant. I can count on my one hand the number of Members on the Government side as we begin the Debate for today. The Minister of Justice who presented the Bill is not here nor is his State Minister. The Minister of Foreign presented a Bill today, which is to be debated later, connected to these matters of justice - the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) (Amendment) Bill - and he is also not here. We only see three or four Members right at the back row of the Government benches. So, this is the seriousness with which the Government approaches an issue such as the laws' delays and the administration of justice in this country.

There is yet another matter that I want to address before I get to the subject matter and that is to do with the Question that was raised by the Hon. Leader of the Opposition two days ago after due notice and I do not think an answer has been given as yet. In that also, the Government is remiss. The Questions that were posed are of enormous significance. He presented certain figures to show the state of the economy of the country at present. The Government is unable to confirm that after three days. The state of the economy is at an unprecedented low. That is something that we, as Parliament, must take note of, not only take note of, but act on because eventually, under Article 148 of the Constitution, Parliament is supposed to have full control of public finance. So, Parliament also seems to be remiss, if we are not taking proper action with regard to the state, the depth to which the economy of the country has fallen.

The Hon. Minister of Foreign presented a Bill which is connected to the subject matter today - the Amendment to the Prevention of Terrorism Act. It is strange that on the day he presents the Bill to Parliament, we have in all the newspapers the Minister of Justice saying that this Act will be repealed in toto. The Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act, No. 48 of 1979 was brought in for a period of six months and we have lived with it for longer than 42 years now. That ought to be repealed. That had been promised by successive Governments. Now, the day that the international community is being assured that that draconian piece of legislation will be repealed in toto and a new Act will be enacted in its place, the Minister of Foreign stands up and presents an Amendment Bill, calling it reform. The Hon. Minister of Foreign would remember that when I met him in Jaffna about 10 days ago, I told the learned Professor that at this rate, the word reform will have to be redefined in the dictionary. He did not disagree with me. There is absolutely nothing new in the Amendment that has been proposed. Access to an Attorney-at-Law is already there. We even amended the Criminal Procedure Code some time ago. Every single thing that is in the Amendment is already a part of the law. Making the 18-month preventive detention to 12 months makes no difference on the ground whatever because if you are produced before the Magistrate during any time, Section 7 of the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act states that the Magistrate shall remand the person till the conclusion of the trial; it is an indefinite detention and that is what we know. We do not know of people who have been released because 18 months have lapsed and no one is going to be released now because 12 months have lapsed. Before that, they

755 756

[

2022 10

will be produced before a Magistrate, who is bound to remand that person till the conclusion of the trial and the trial is supposed to be in the High Court. We only know of persons who have been there for longer than the 18 years, not for 18 months; 18 years, much longer! And they are still there under the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act although in some emblematic cases, you have released or consented to release and therefore, released some important personalities on bail.

Sir, yesterday, Attorney-at-Law Hejaaz Hizbullah came out on bail. I am very glad that he is out on bail at least now, after almost two years. Poet Ahnaf was also released on bail. But, they were released on bail after the Resolutions of the UN Human Rights Council and those of various other places named them as emblematic cases, as prisoners of conscience. But, there are many others who have not had the fortune of being named prisoners of conscience and they have been there for 20 or 25 years and some have been there for over 30 years. There are, at least, 300 to 400 people at the moment detained under the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act, of whom no one talks about.

I am also glad that when the Court of Appeal made the Order to grant bail, His Lordship Justice Neil Iddawala, of whom we knew in this august Assembly, made reference to this Act and in that short Order - three times, he uses the word "draconian". But, he also says it is the duty of the Legislature to change it. The Executive has said that they will change it. In the meantime, Justice Iddawala says that the Judiciary must interpret it in such a way that the draconian provisions of that law do not have a negative impact. That is a welcome Order, but, I repeat, that has applied only to one, two or three persons, whose cases have been highlighted. So, the law must be repealed in toto. This is not even an eye-wash.

Then, moving on to the Amendments that have already been proposed and before us, I welcome them. As has been said, this comes from the recommendations of Justice Aluwihares Committee to expedite the disposal of cases, and pre-trial procedure in criminal matters is also a welcome move. But, whatever amendments we make, whatever changes we make even to the rules of court, we still have this perennial problem of laws' delays. I heard many Hon. Members from both sides of the House blaming the lawyers for most of these delays and I agree, being a lawyer myself, that lawyers are a great part of this problem.

However, it is not only the lawyers - lawyers must bear most of the blame - but there are also others to be blamed, and the system itself too has to be put right. These Amendments are welcome, but they, this patchwork or this tinkering, would not help that process.

Sir, I heard yesterday reference being made to the Administration of Justice Law that Hon. Felix Dias Bandaranaike brought in the 1970s but did not stand the test of time. In 1978, when Prime Minister J.R. Jayewardene took over, the first few things that he did was to repeal AJL Civil and AJL Criminal and bring back the Criminal Procedure Code and the Civil Procedure Code. Those laws are good, those procedural laws have a great amount of protection built into them, but they result

in long delays and for modern day, we must change that system. We must make it quick in order that the crux of the matter is found. I heard the Hon. Minister who spoke before me talking about files being two, three feet high. Sometimes, the brief is big, but the question that has to be decided is very small. So, we must find ways of getting to the crux of the dispute and disposing it in very quick time. Therefore, in order to expedite the process, increasing the number of courts - [Interruption.]

( ) (The Hon. Speaker) , .

.. ( .. ) (The Hon. M.A. Sumanthiran) Thank you, Sir. There are only a handful in the Government benches and they too are having their private conference there. No one seems to be concerned about these important matters that are being discussed in this House and now, they are all getting up and leaving as well. The Hon. Minister is not here, as I said. No one is here even to respond to the questions that are raised properly at a debate. I have not seen the front two rows empty like this for a long time.

Sir, these are important issues because in a country, administration of justice is fundamental to the functioning of a democratic society because that is the place to which an ordinary citizen can go and find relief, not just between citizen and citizen but even against the State itself. We have come a long way in finding the State liable towards its citizens and we have a long way to go also in that. Judicial attitudes also need to change.

There was reference to the independence of the Judiciary and allegations are traded as usual by the two main parties saying, During our time, we did not interfere with the Judiciary and the other side says, No, no, we did not interfere with the Judiciary, but you did. The truth is that you both do, you both interfere with the independence of the Judiciary. This is just like corruption. Whenever issues of corruption arise, all that the Government Benchers say is, When you were in office, this is what you did. They do not say anything about what they are doing, and when the musical chairs change, the other side says, When you were in office, you did this. Both are right; both are true. They just take turns to strip the country of its resources, they take turns to deny the citizen justice and they blame each other when the shoe is on the other foot. That is how this country has come to the state it is in now. I am not saying this from a lofty pedestal or anything like that; I am much a cog in the wheel now as any other person is. But, I am asking, is it not time, when our economy has hit rock bottom and when the judicial system, the administration of justice has come to this perilous state, at least now, for us to take cognizance of this together, beyond party lines and put the system right? Because if we do not do that, the citizens will do it. That is how revolutions took place in history.

Thank you.

757 758

( ) (The Hon. Speaker) The next speaker is the Hon. (Dr.) Susil Premajayantha.

Order, pleas! Before he starts, will an Hon. Member propose the Hon. Shantha Bandara to the Chair?

( - ) (The Hon. Dullas Alahapperuma - Minister of Mass Media) Sir, I propose that the Hon. Shantha Bandara do now take the Chair.

. . Question put, and agreed to.

.

, , .

Whereupon THE HON. SPEAKER left the Chair, and THE HON. SHANTHA BANDARA took the Chair.

[.. 11.39

( () ) (The Hon. (Dr.) Susil Premajayantha) , , 195 263 . 5 () . .

19 5 . -1995 - . . . , . , Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, No. ....... of 2021 . Act number . 1979 15 , - .- 195 . 195 . 195 , " " . 195 () () .

. " " . . . , , , , . , 3 . 296 317 . 200 . , 14 . - trial stage - . . 14 . . . , , - Bar Association - . Trial-at-Bar . , Permanent Trial-at-Bar . . . .

, . , , - , - . - pre-trial conference - . . , pre-trial . -19 . . , quarantine . Skype , . . 241 . , -19 . . , .

759 760

2022 10

, 195 -1- (3)() , . . , . 3() , . . , . , . , 3() , 263 . 3 () :

"263 ;"

263 ()

. , 263 " " . , . . . Trial-at-Bar . , ? . , . , . non-jury trials High Courts . , '' . - practice - . 20,000 . practise , . 7 . . , . .

1978 2 5() " ." . High Courts Trial Judges . Trial Judge refer , pre-trial . , , . ,

. , . , 3 (6) , . .

. . . .

, , . . . , . . . . - . .

- the rule of law - . . -19 2 - ; ; . , . . , , , ; . , , , . , ? . . . . , .

. State Attorney . - jurisdiction - . 1,200 pass out . . , -

761 762

, - - guidance - . , , , , .

, , chip , rehabilitate . . 2 ,000, 30,000 . , . . . , , . . , . , . . , , , .

, . , .

. ( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) Next, the Hon. Rauff Hakeem. You have 10 minutes. [11.54 a.m.] ( ) (The Hon. Rauff Hakeem) Bismillahir Rahmanir Raheem.

Hon. Presiding Member, the Hon. Minister of Justice has presented three important Bills that deal with Amendments to the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, the Civil Procedure Code as well as to the Judicature Act, which provide for the concept of pre-trial judges and some procedural matters connected to their functions. So, this is a very welcome move. All of us have no objection

to this important concept being introduced. It will no doubt reduce the burden on the trial judges to dispose of pre-trial issues expeditiously, and perhaps, save some time. Of course, the Ministry and the Judicial Service Commission will have to equip the system with men and material to make this a reality, which is a matter that everybody would concede.

However, yesterday, when I listened to the Hon. Minister, he was seen labouring the point that our Judiciary is independent and that the Ministry does not wish to unduly influence those in charge of judicial functions. Certainly, none of us are accusing the Hon. Minister, who was a regular practitioner in courts until he took over the Cabinet Ministry, to be influencing judges. But, he laboured that point time and again to say that the Government does not influence the judges. The fact is, under the Twentieth Amendment to the Constitution, the procedure of appointment and promotion of judges is left exclusively with the Executive - of course, the so-called Parliamentary Council is virtually a rubber stamp - and it results in indirect influence being exercised. That is a fact and that is why people are opposed to this Twentieth Amendment to the Constitution.

Having said that, let me also say that laws' delays will not disappear just because you make these laws and make sanctimonious pronouncements, saying that we are a responsible member of the international community and that we never interfere with the Judiciary. These sanctimonious comments are not going to simply make it possible for you to get over the problem of laws' delays in our courts. Now, this Governments record of abusing the Prevention of Terrorism Act to take revenge on their political opponents and innocent people has resulted in matters being referred to in Resolutions before the Human Rights Council and those that had been passed even in the European Parliament and moved in the US Senate with several members commenting on the human rights situation in this country and the way in which the Prevention of Terrorism Act is being abused. So, in Parliaments of many countries of the Commonwealth including the United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand and in many other countries, these matters regarding the abuse of the Prevention of Terrorism Act do come up. This morning, in fact, when the Amendment to the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act was being presented, after the Secretary-General read out its Title, I asked from the Hon. Minister of Foreign regarding the issue that has been raised by the European Union at the Joint Commission discussions.

There is a joint communiqu that had been issued by EU-Sri Lanka Joint Commission. Here is what The Morning newspaper states today about that, I quote:

However, the EU noted that important elements had not been included in the PTA (Amendment) Bill that has been gazetted. Sri Lanka took note of the views expressed by the EU to take further steps to make the PTA fully compliant with international norms.

I asked the Hon. Minister, "Are you going to move Amendments?" But, he tried to avoid the issue saying, We will take it up when the Bill is taken up for debate.

763 764

[ ()

2022 10

( ) (The Hon. Shehan Semasinghe ) We are going to propose Amendments. ( ) (The Hon. Rauff Hakeem) Let us see how far it will be in keeping with the good practices in other countries. We do not have much faith in this Government with the way the PTA is already being abused.

The latest fiasco is the the intemperate statement made by the Foreign Ministry targeting Ms. Ambika Satkunanathan, a respected former Commissioner of the Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka, for having apprised the Committee of the European Parliament appointed to review the GSP Plus facility about the rights situation in Sri Lanka. I would now like to quote from the article titled "A dangerous dog-whislte" in the Daily FT of 07th , February, 2022.

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs descended to new lows last week by issuing a statement publicly targeting Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka former member and prominent human rights lawyer Ambika Sathkunanathan."

The targeted attack by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs against a Sri Lankan citizen and human rights advocate for engaging with international mechanisms concerned with the deteriorating rights situation in the island was roundly condemned.

Now, what does the Ministry say?

". the Ministry claimed her submission to the EU Parliament was 'reminiscent of LTTE propaganda'."

A veiled threat was being held out against this human rights activist. This is a very unbecoming attitude and in my opinion, a very undiplomatic way of confronting an individual with the Foreign Ministry going to the unprecedented levels of issuing a statement! And we are only becoming a pariah State by engaging in such fruitless exercises.

These new provisions, of course, may reduce the misery of laws' delays when it comes to pre-trial matters. But, what about the long-suffering suspects arrested by the CID, the TID and the CCD, the so-called specialized agencies of the Police which have been willy-nilly arresting people on flimsy grounds while taking cover under the Prevention of Terrorism Act and keeping people for 90 days at a time and some, for about two years or more?

Yesterday, Hejaaz Hizbullah was finally given bail after 22 months in custody! Sir, I would like to quote from the Judgment given by His Lordship Neil Iddawala, former member of the officials bench of this House. It is a very well prepared Judgment. In that, what does His Lordship Neil Iddawala say? I quote:

"The PTA is the result of a Bill titled An Act to make temporary provisions for the prevention of acts of terrorism in Sri Lanka, ..."

( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) Hon. Member, you have two minutes more.

( ) (The Hon. Rauff Hakeem) Sir, I think I have four minutes. ( ) (The Hon. Shantha Bandara) No. ( ) (The Hon. Rauff Hakeem) The Judgment further states, I quote:

"A careful reading of the corresponding Hansard (in 1979 Volume 5 Columns 1428- 1596) clearly sets out the temporary nature of the statute highlighting in specificity the contextualised enactment of the same. Reference was made to terrorism in the context of separatist ideology perpetuated by the objective to establish Eelam..."

His Lordship further goes on to say, I quote:

Since then, four decades have passed, and the PTA has strayed far away from its historical context. The PTA, if in its application and implementation, creates a vicious cycle of abuse, the very purpose of the statute will be defeated."

"However, it is alleged that the PTA has been utilised at times to the detriment of personal liberty by its draconian implementation."

"Ultimately, it is up to the Legislature to ensure that the draconian elements of the law combating terrorism are dispensed with per modern day contexts. Until such time, it is the judiciarys duty to employ existing legal provisions and constitutional powers to interpret the same elements in the interests of justice.

Having said that only he gave bail to Hejaaz Hizbullah. So, that is what one of the former distinguished members of the Officials' Bench of this House, Justice Neil Iddawala, says in his Judgment.

I think it is also important for us to have a look at other judgments. Take the Judgment of Shani Abeysekaras case. There again, when granting bail to Shani Abeysekara by the Court of Appeal, there was condemnation of fabricating evidence. There were other such observations in many other cases. What about Azath Salleys case? In that case, the presiding Judge saw the flimsy way in which the indictments had been presented and Mr. Salley was finally acquitted from all charges and released. This is the way in which you all are using the PTA and various other provisions. Particularly in Azath Salleys case, you used the hate speech provisions in the ICCPR Act. Then, what happens? You use the hate speech provisions in the ICCPR Act to take revenge on your political opponents, but when men in robes come and use absolute hate speech, they are rewarded, with one being appointed as Chairman of the Presidential Task Force! That is what happens. If you are in robes, you can engage in hate speech as you like. That is what the Executive thinks. Is this the way you are going to behave? The international community has seen through this duplicity by the Government and that is why now you are forced to amend the PTA. But amending the PTA alone

765 766

would not do; you have to totally get rid of it and introduce a new Act, at least a Counter Terrorism Act separately in keeping with the good international practices. That is what I have to say, Sir.

I know my time is up, Sir, but let me also say a few words about the need to enact a contempt of court law. What happened to Ranjan Ramanayake? In his case, clearly it was seen as an excessive sentence, four years! Of course, his impropriety in uttering things outside this House may have landed him in trouble, but the excessive sentence was an issue. So, after Ranjan Ramanayakes case, we feel that a contempt of court law must be enacted and that the discretion of courts also has to be properly streamlined and limited. That has to happen; that has been felt for a long time. There was something on the drawing board - Senior Counsel Mr. Kanag-Isvaran has presented a paper through the Bar Association for consideration by the Minister of Justice as well. Then, a draft law was also presented; that is there on the drawing board. A contempt of court law is an important thing. The Judiciary Accountability Act is another one which is available in Singapore. Then, we also have to have a Sentencing Policy Act because there are variances between sentences by two judges on the same matter and all these matters need to be considered. I think it is only through these types of new legislations that we can ensure that at least a certain seminal justice would prevail in this country, particularly with the attitude of this Government towards abuse of such special laws like the PTA and the ICCPR Act.

Thank you. ( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) . 12 .

[.. 12.0 ( ) (The Hon. Sagara Kariyawasam) , .

, . . " " . . , , .

, ? , .

, , . . , .

, , . , . .

, , . , . , . . . , , . , ; . , . . , . ?

; .

767 768

[

2022 10

. . . 12.00 , , .

, , . , , , .

. 2 , - - . , , . , . . . , , . .

. ( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) () . 12 . 12.1 .

[.. 12.1 ( () ) (The Hon. (Dr.) Harsha de Silva) , .

. .

27(2) . . 11, 12 . 10, 12 . . , , .

, . . . , . 7 . , , . . . . , . , 25 . , . . .

. , , , . . . . . ? 2,000 , 25 . . , . . Retrospective tax, , . . 2020 2021 . - regressive - . .

, , '' . 2022 03 * .

769 770

* . * . * Placed in the Library.

, 5 , " '' , 2017 24 ;" . . 2017 24 . '' * .

, " , , , , , " . , objective . , ; . 2007 07 '' . , . ? ? , Legal Draftsmans Department ? ? . , " . , " . , , " . . , . . . 100 . . . , . . . , 25 . , . , ? 1953 .... , . , 195 .. .

, . -- - - 12 . . ,

, - 3,000- . 2020 - 2021 . , 2019 . Website , 2019 . . , press releases 2020-2021 250 . . . . 14 . . , 2016 Super Gain Tax . . . , . . 25. 250 . , - - . . ETF 30 . . . 65 . 65 EPF . . , . , 12. , .

1989 . . . 19 9. 2011 . , . . , ; . 201 ETF , . . , , . 195 . 0.5. , 2.5 2.5 . , . ,-

( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) , .

771 772

[ ()

* . * . * Placed in the Library.

2022 10

( () ) (The Hon. (Dr.) Harsha de Silva) . .

2021 , . . . 14. , .

. . , reverse . reverse , .

, . ( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) Order, please! 1.30 .

.. 1.30 .

, .. 1.30 .

Sitting accordingly suspended till 1.30 p.m. and then resumed,

( ) (The Deputy Secretary-General) , .

. ( . ) (The Hon. Premnath C. Dolawatte) " " .

( ) (The Hon. Samanpriya Herath)

. . Seconded.

. . Question put, and agreed to. .

,

. Whereupon THE HON. AJITH RAJAPAKSE took the Chair.

( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) . . 12 .

[.. 1.30

. ( . ) (The Hon. Premnath C. Dolawatte) , .

Sir, even though the Hon. M.A. Sumathiran accused us that we are not participating in the Debate, from the beginning I have been listening to his speech. But, while I deliver my speech, he is not here.

Sir, if we take the proposed Amendment, pre-trail conferences in the High Court shall be held for fixing a date as expeditiously as possible for the commencement of the day-to- day trail as specified in Section 263 of the Criminal Procedure Code and also for considering and making orders relating to any other matter that may be required to be attended to, prior to the commencement of the trial and that may facilitate the conduct of the day-to-day trial. As we are aware, in terms of the existing law, the proviso to Section 263 (1) of the Criminal Procedure Code already stipulates that. Every trial in the High Court with a jury or without a jury shall, as far as practicable, be held day-to-day. The said Section leaves it to judicial discretion to determine the practicability of conducting a day-to-day trial. As such, the Court will be able to take cognizance of many factors including the existing work load in the courthouse, the availability of witnesses, the convenience of parties and their respective counsels, the ability of parties to retain counsels and the availability of the counsel of the accused's choice for the given period. In view of that, there should not be any deviation from the existing provisions of Section 263 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and the question of fixing High Court trials on a day-to-day basis should continue to be left to be resolved on the discretion of the respective judges, as specified in section 263 of the Criminal Procedure Code. The conduct of day-to-day trials in High Court without leaving the decision in the hands of the judges and without taking into account the availability of the counsels and the circumstances of the respective parties will result in many hardships such as the provision depriving the accused, especially those with limited means, of his right to select the counsel of his choice. So, I firmly believe that due consideration should be given to the financial capabilities of parties including the accused and the aggrieved party and their capacity of retaining a peferred counsel without a difficulty. The view that an accused who does not have sufficient means to retain the services of an Attorney, if he so wishes, can obtain the services of an Attorney provided to him at State cost fails to take into account the right a party has to select a counsel of his choice, which is a fundamental right for a fair trial and a right which cannot be substituted to compensate by the nomination of an assigned counsel.

Sir, we had a long consideration regarding this matter and a long discussion within the Government Group

773 774

because we know that a day-to-day trial is a little bit impracticable and also causes hardship for any accused or aggrieved party. So, I must thank all the Colleagues of the Government who are lawyers, including the Hon. Jayantha Weerasinghe, the Hon. (Dr.) Susil Premajayantha, the Hon. Madhura Withanage and the Hon. Anura Priuyadharshana Yapa and also the Prime Minister himself for settling this matter. We have now brought a new Amendments to the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill by deleting line 11 and substituting the words "conduct a trial as specified", deleting line 34 and substituting the words "trial as specified in Section" and deleting line 5 and substituting the words "facilitate the conduct of the". Likewise, we have made several changes to the Amendments to the Code of Criminal Procedure Act. So, I believe the Hon. Minister will maintain it as he promised us and will bring in whatever necessary Amendments to the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill.

, , , . . This is what we call the Legislature, this is how we make laws and that is how we debate in our own Group. . . . , , . . , . , , . . , . , 20, 25 . , . , . . . , . , , . . , , .

, .

, , , , , , . , , . . , practice -- . ; . , ? , , . . . . , .

, . , , , . . , . . ,-

( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) , .

. ( . ) (The Hon. Premnath C. Dolawatte) , .

( ) (The Hon. Samanpriya Herath) , .

. ( . ) (The Hon. Premnath C. Dolawatte) , .

. , .

775 776

[ .

2022 10

. . . , , . , , , .

. , . ; , . . , , . , . " " , " " , " " . , , . , . , , ? . , , , . , .

- PTA - . . 20, 25 , . , . . , . , 10 . . - - , , Patriot Act Act . , . .

, . , , . . , . . ,

. . , , ; Trial-at-Bar . . . , telephone calls .

, . , . , , . , . .

, - - . . . .

( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) , .

. ( . ) (The Hon. Premnath C. Dolawatte) , , .

. . . .

, . .. . .. . .. 55 . .

.

777 778

( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) . .

[.. 1.45

( ) (The Hon. Patali Champika Ranawaka) , .

. . , , . , , , , . . 197 27, 2 . , . , 1 . 2. .

, . 1.9. 2,07 . 1,500 , , .

, , 03 579 . , .

, - - . 4.1 . , 1.1. 5.2 - 5,200-

. 220 51.2 . 2019 ; 37.5 . , , . , .

, 4.5. , 200 , 500 , 1,000 , . .

, -EPF- ETF . -EPF- 2, 29.5 2020 . ETF 35 .4 . ; . 2 1.9 .

EPF ETF . , . , , . . , . , . . , . 26 . 26 . 25 75 . , 25 . ? ? 26 ?

.

779 780

2022 10

. . . , , , 0 , , , , , , , ? , , , . 5 . 40 50 . 40 . , 20 .

, , , , . . . . , .

. . . , .

( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) . 9 .

[..1.55 ( ) (The Hon. Samanpriya Herath) , .

( )

" - " . ; .

, . . . . .

, . . ? . , . .

, . . . . .

. , . , . , . , , . . , .

, , . . , . .

781 782

, . , , . ; . , .

. . - - . . , . , . .

. , - - . . , . . . . . online . . .

, , . . " - " . 69 . .

. , . . . , ,

, . , . . . 14 . . . . . . , .

. . , , . . , . , , .

( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) .. . 12 .

.... ( . . ) (The Hon. G.G. Ponnambalam) Hon. Presiding Member, out of the 12 minutes, I would like to give two minutes to my Colleague, the Hon. Selvarajah Kajendren, who will speak after me some time later. So, I will take ten minutes.

( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) Okay. [2.03 p.m.]

.... ( . . ) (The Hon. G.G. Ponnambalam) Hon. Presiding Member, today, whilst we debate various Amendment Bills that come under the Ministry of Justice and also relating to provincial councils, there is a daily occurrence that is taking place in the seas of the North, where fishermen from the Jaffna District and the Northern Province in general are losing their livelihoods on a daily basis. People from outside those waters are coming there, using illegal fishing means and literally destroying the livelihoods of the fishermen of the Northern Province. If you take the Northern Province,

783 784

[

2022 10

Sir, there are roughly 50,000 families, totalling to nearly 200,000 individuals who are directly involved in fishing. If you take the Jaffna District, 23,000 families and if not more than 100,000 individuals are directly involved in fishing. Now, the destruction of livelihoods of these fishermen is happening due to Sri Lankan fishermen who do not belong to the North-East coming to those areas and with the help of the Navy and the armed forces, they are permitted to use illegal fishing means and are destroying the livelihoods of the local fishermen. They are effectively competing unfairly to a point where the Navy continues to insist on oppressive conditions for the local fishermen whereas these outsiders who come with the full support of the Navy are entitled to an open season of fishing and as a result, those people in the North are being severely handicapped.

On top of that, Sir, there have also been encroachments by fishermen from India, particularly from Tamil Nadu, into the northern fishing waters. These are matters that we have consistently raised not only in the Ministerial Consultative Committee on Fisheries, but also in the Ministerial Consultative Committee on Defence. We also have raised it several times on the Floor of this House, that these fishermen who do not belong to the Northern area, being allowed to come into those waters, are destroying the livelihoods of the local fishermen. They are destroying the livelihoods of the local fishermen to the point where, to date, the destruction is valued at over Rs. 600 million; to date, in the Northern Province, the value of the damages done is estimated to be over Rs. 600 million and if you take Jaffna alone, it is at Rs. 250 million. So, this situation cannot continue, Sir, and we directly blame the Sri Lankan Government for deliberately allowing this situation to persist because it is a policy to pauperize the fishing community to a point where they cannot sustain their livelihoods by fishing and are expected to leave the coastline so that those areas can be colonized.

This is happening at a time when the Minister in charge of fisheries, the subject Minister, is a man who claims to be elected from the North, a man who claims to have got elected by the people of the North, by the Jaffna peoples votes. Whilst he sits in the Front Benches of this Government, this disaster is taking place. Can you imagine the anger that the fisherfolk in the North are feeling? They elected a person to go and fight on behalf of them and to secure their rights under this Government, and that man cannot do a thing; he cannot do a thing because he is overruled or he himself is such a

[ .] [ ] [Expunged on the order of the Chair.]

that he has to get together with the military and carry on an agenda that destroys the very livelihoods of the people who voted for him! That is the situation that the nothern fisherfolk are facing. They have been consistently protesting.

Sir, we, in fact, wanted an Adjournment Debate on this issue; my Colleague, the Hon. Selvarajah Kajendren

asked for an Adjournment Debate on this yesterday. The Chief Opposition Whip, in fact, was good enough to allot time yesterday for the debate to take place, but because of the way in which the subject of the Adjournment Motion was eventually finalized, the Indian High Commission felt that we were in some way trying to accuse them as well and asked us to defer the Motion, giving us an assurance that, regardless of what the Sri Lankan Navy does, they realize that the situation has reached a climax, that it has reached a crisis situation and that they have decided, on their own accord, to take steps to prevent Indian fishermen from encroaching.

A foreign country can contact us, give us that assurance and ask us to defer the Motion, but this Government which, ultimately, is responsible for the fishermen of the North cannot give us those assurances and the disgraceful [ .] [ ] [Expunged on the order of the Chair.]

continues to sit as a Cabinet Minister and a Frontbencher, despite the fact that his own Government refuses to give those assurances! This is not to blame anybody else. The Navy, today, continues to be in the North-East without the consent of the people of the North-East. They are an occupying force; they are an occupying force literally, Sir, because they are occupying our private land! They confiscate our own land, they are there, they maintain their presence, they harass us, they accuse us for all the wrong things, they harass us in the high seas asking us for various passes and various proofs to allow us to continue to fish in our own waters, but they cannot prevent foreign fishermen from encroaching and destroying our assets. Why are they there? For what purpose are they there? If they are deliberately there to allow these foreign forces and outsiders from the North-East to come in and destroy the livelihoods of the fishermen of the North East, then they are there only for one purpose, to pauperize the fishing community and destroy their economy to such an extent that they would, in fact, leave their land which gives them an opportunity to fish so that others can come and colonize. It is a systematic genocidal agenda that this Government is pursuing and that must be placed on record.

Sir, this is something that we have repeatedly brought up and we will say it again that it is because of these forms of attitudes of consecutive Governments that the Tamil people say, If we do not have our destiny in our own hands, we will not be able to sustain our identity on this Island. And it is with respect to these sort of problems we face that we must find solutions, not to some arbitrary Thirteenth Amendment or a Unitary State which, in fact, exacerbates our problems and makes us even to consent to our own destruction. That cannot take place. Such decisions cannot be allowed and we will consistently insist in this House that our rights be granted to a point that we ourselves can prevent these injustices from happening to our people.

Thank you.

785 786

( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) . 12 .

[.. 2.13]

( ) (The Hon. Kulasingam Dhileeban) , . , , . , . . , . , . . , .

, . ! , - .

. , . , . , . . , . , .

, . '' . , 50,000 , 5,000 , 25,000 . . , .

, . . ! ! ! . , - - . , - . ; . , poster . . , ! !

WhatsApp group . , ? ? ! " . , . , . -

787 788

2022 10

( ) (The Hon. Selvarajah Kajendren) Sir, I rise to a point of Order.

. EPDP . ,

[ .] [ ] [Expunged on the order of the Chair.]

.

( ) (The Hon. Kulasingam Dhileeban) , . , . , " !" , ! .

( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) , .

( ) (The Hon. Kulasingam Dhileeban) . .

, , , , , . , . , , , , , .

. . ,

. , , , , . , . , . , , . , ' ' . . stickers . , 10,000 , . , , . .

( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) . .

[.. 2.24]

( ) (The Hon. Rishad Bathiudeen) .

, ( ) () . . , . 18 . 12 . . Section 7 remand , trial . bail . .

18-20

789 790

. , . , trial . 12,000 , WhatsApp, Facebook social media , . .

. . . , . , , . , 20 , . PTA . . , , . .

bail . , , , 20,000 . - 2018 17 , , . .

CID , "2018

, . , 10-15 " . , " " . , . , 4 . 26 - 27 . 4 . , . . , 300 , 25-30 . 275 - 270 . , . , , , . . , - .

. , , , . . . , . , . bail . conditional bail ,

791 792

[

2022 10

! , ! , .

, "One Country, One Law" ! , , . - , "One Country, One Law" , , . , . .

( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) . 12 .

[.. 2.32

( ) (The Hon. Premitha Bandara Tennakoon) , , . , , . , . - 19 . . , . , . . , - 19 . . . , 130 . 200 . 115 . . 2,500 . , .

, . . , . . , . , . . . . , . - - . .

, . 74 . . . . 74 . , 74 . , , . . , " " . . . , , . .

, . , , " " . , . . , ; ; ; . , .

, 15 . 15 ; , . , . , , , . 15 , .

793 794

, , . . , . , , , . , , . . , .

, . - ; . , . -, . ; ; . . , .

, . . , . . , , , , . , .

. - - . . , . . . . , , . . . . , " " .

, , , . . , . . , . . . .

, , , . . , - - , . , , . . , .

, . . .

. . 1 . . , , , , 1 . , . .

, . . ; ; . , .

.

( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) . 6 .

[.. 2.45 ( ) (The Hon. Mayantha Dissanayake) , , "Justice delayed is justice denied" . , 1 6 . , " " . , .

, , 3 - 3- . , , .

795 796

[

2022 10

200 . " " . , . , . ; ; ; . .

, , , , , , , . , -- , . , , . , . . , . " " .

. 19 0 - - ; . , . . . , , , , . . -PTA and Counter Terrorism Bill- . .

, , . . . . . , , Facebook share CID ; . , CID . , .

, . , . Prevention of Terrorism Act - PTA - . .

, . Chief Justice. , . .

( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) , . ( ) (The Hon. Mayantha Dissanayake) .

, law renewal system . contempt of court . , .

; . . , . , .

, . , .

( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) , ... . 12 .

[.. 2.53]

. . . ( ... ) (The Hon. S.M.M. Muszhaaraff) , () .

797 798

1979 48 ? , , ? , . "100 . , " . , PTA Prevention of Terrorism Act - .

. ? ? PTA , ; ! , , , , ; . 1979 , 43 , , . , .

, Counter Terrorism Bill . ; . , . , . ; . , . . , , .

, digital , , , . , "18 " 12 . , " " . . , .

, . , . , , . , .

. , . , 2000 Union of Regions - , . 13 . , , . .

. .

799 800

[ ...

2022 10

3 . , 9 3 . , 11 PTA . , 13 . , . . , ? , ? . . PTA . , , , .

, , . , , reconciliation - . Reconciliation , . , .

, , ' ' . , '' . . . , . . ,

. ; ! , ... . , '' . . , , .

. , . ! . . . , . , . , , , , .

18 ; . , . 18 500 . , . , . , , , , , .

( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) . 6 .

[.. 3.03] ( ) (The Hon. Imran Maharoof) , .

801 802

, . . ? ? . , . , , . , . ? .

, . " " , . 2019-2020 100 10 , 25 . ? .

. , . . . , .

, . ; . - . ? . , , . , . ? ? , .

( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) , .

( ) (The Hon. Imran Maharoof) . . , . , . , . , . . 2019 . , . , , , . .

( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) .. . .

[.. 3.0 .. ( .. - , , ) (The Hon. D.B. Herath - State Minister of Livestock, Farm Promotion and Dairy and Egg Related Industries) , . . . , . . , ,

803 804

[

2022 10

. . , . " - " . " " , . " - " . -- . , .

. . , , " " . , 25, 30, 40 , . . . . . . , .

, . . . , " , ?" .

. , . , . , . . ,

. . , .

, . . 97 . . , , , . . . , .

. .

. ; . , . , . . . , . . , .

, . , . . , . . , . .

805 806

, . , . , " 26 , ." . , . , . , . . ? . ? , , .

, . . . . ; . . . , . - - . , .

? . , , . . , . .

, . , . . .

, .

, . . .

, . , . . . . . " . , " .

, , , , . . . .

, . ( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) . . .

[.. 3.21]

. ( . ) (The Hon. M. Udayakumar) , ! . , . . , .

, 13 .

807 808

[ ..

2022 10

. . . , , . . , ! . ! .

, . , , . , , . . , . . , . , ; . , , . , . .

, . , . , . , .

,

, . , . , . . , . . , .

, , . , . , - - - paperless Budget . . . , . .

, . , , . , . , 1,800 . 500 . .

. . , . ; . , , . .

, . , 149,900 . ,

809 810

. , . , . . , . , 5,000 , . . 500 .

, , . Moodys . , 65 129 . , . , Transparency International 2021 94 102 .

3.3 2 . . , 175 94 . .

( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) , .

. ( . ) (The Hon. M. Udayakumar) , .

, . economy recovery .

, bailout . . , . ? .

.. . . , , . , . , ! , . . . , , . .

.. . ( .. - ) (The Hon. C.B. Rathnayake - Minister of Wildlife and Forest Conservation) , . . . .

( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) . 15 .

[.. 3.31

( - , , , , ) (The Hon. Shehan Semasinghe - State Minister of Samurdhi, Household Economy, Micro Finance, Self-employment and Business Development) , ,

811 812

[ .

2022 10

. . . , . , . , -2015-2019 , - 10 14 . 10 14 , , .

, 2017 24 . 55, 60 . , . , . 9 . , . 9 , , . . . . . . , , 10 14 .

2017 24 , . , . 10 14 . ? , .

? 15

, . . . . , , . . . ? . , , .

? , . , ? - 2,000 - . , . . . . . . , , . 15 16 , - - . , 10 14 .

, . , . . , 15 - , - . .

813 814

? .

, , . , . . ? ; ; . , , , , , . , . . , . . , , . , , . . . , , . , , .

, . , . - - 2015-2019 . , . , .

, . 2015 . 2015 . 2014 2015 . ? . 2015 .

, . . ? , , 7.2 . ? . . , . , , , .

, , . ? , ; ; .

, . . , . ? ?

, 2022 . , , , . . ? , .

, .

815 816

[

2022 10

, , , , , .

, . , , . . , . . , " . . . " . , ? , - .- . , . . . , .

, , , , . .

( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) . 10 .

[.. 3.50]

( ) (The Hon. Selvarajah Kajendren) , . , . , .

31 . , 37 21 .. . . . , ; 13 . .

. , . , ; ; . , 11 31 . . . . , .

,

[ .] [ ] [Expunged on the order of the Chair.]

. 23,000 . , 100,000 . , 50,000 200,000 .

817 818

31 , , . , . . , , , . . . , , , , . , , , . ... , . , . .

. , , " . , " , . , . ; . ; . , , .

250 , . , , ,

. . , " " . , . 34 , 13 . , . , , , , , . ; . , .

. 53 10 - 26 . . , . 6 60 . 6 . . , , , , , . .

. , . , .. . . . ,

819 820

[

2022 10

, , , , . , ! !

. , 3 - 7 . , " " . , ! ; . ! ! !

. . , , , , . , , . , , . , .

[.. 4.01 .. . ( .. - ) (The Hon. C.B. Rathnayake - Minister of Wildlife and Forest Conservation) , . 21 , , . , .

, . . , "" . . . . 1977 . , . , , . , . . . , , , . , ; . , , , . .

, 30 . . , , . , , , . . . .

, . . , , . , , .

, . . -

821 822

. - . , , .

( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) ... . 20 .

[.. 4.07 .. . ( ... - ) (The Hon. M.U.M. Ali Sabry - Minister of Justice) , 5 . , . , . .

. , . , , . . , . . . , .

. , . , , CID , . , .

, , . .

, 42 , .

. . . . ? 42 , ( ) . . . . , . , . , , , . 42 .

, . - 13 - , . . , . . , " " . , " " . . . , . ( ) 12 . -- . ( ) . . .

, " , , " . , .

823 824

[ ..

2022 10

? . . . , 13(5) . , "" . . . .

, .. , . , .

21 . , 21 . . 7 . . , ?

, , , . . . . 263 (1) "... ." . , 1994 . 5 . . . , .

" " . , documents , , . , surgeon operation . .

. , . , , .

263 "... ." "" . , . .

. 5 . , , . 63 . " " - "House of Justice" - . 60 . . , . .. . Investment Court . 100 , . .

. , . , 5 . , , , , . , , 350 , . . . . .

.

825 826

, . . . . , . . surgeon operate , . . . , , . .

, , . 1 . . . 2020 Budget present 20,000 - 20 - . . , .

, . . . , . . , , , .

. . , . , . Question put, and agreed to. Bill accordingly read a Second time.

.: '' .'' -[ .. . ]

. " ." - [ ... ]

Resolved: "That the Bill be referred to a Committee of the whole Parliament." - [The Hon. M.U.M. Ali Sabry]

. [ .] . [ .]

Considered in Committee. [THE HON. PRESIDING MEMBER in the Chair.]

1 2 .

1, 2 .

Clauses 1 and 2 ordered to stand part of the Bill.

3 .- 1]

3.- ( 195

. ) CLAUSE 3.- (Insertion of new section 195A in the principal enactment)

.. . ( ... ) (The Hon. M.U.M. Ali Sabry) , :

(1) "2 , 10 17 ( ) :

' 193 - - ;' "

(2) "2 , 33 :

' , , ' "

(3) "3 , 1 :

'() 126 ' "

827 828

[ ...

(13th Start)

2022 10

(4) "3 , 2 :

' 20 ;' "

(5) "4 , 10 :

' ;

, , , ;' "

(6) "4 , 16 :

' ' "

(7) "5 , 12 :

' ' "

(8) "5 , 17 :

' , ' "

.

. Amendments put, and agreed to.

3 .

3 .

Clause 3, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill.

4 .

4 .

Clause 4 ordered to stand part of the Bill.

NEW CLAUSE

.. . ( ... ) (The Hon. M.U.M. Ali Sabry) , :

"7 , 11 :

' 4. 20 , (1) 20 . (1) ()

, , .

() ,

.' . . Brought up, and read the First time

.. . ( ... ) (The Hon. M.U.M. Ali Sabry) , " " .

. . Question put, and agreed to.

.

.

.

.

Question, that the New Clause be added to the Bill, put and agreed to.

New Clause ordered to stand part of the Bill. .

.

.

.

Enacting Clause and Title ordered to stand part of the Bill. Bill reported with Amendments.

.. . ( ... ) (The Hon. M.U.M. Ali Sabry) , " " .

, , , .

. .

, . , .

Question put, and agreed to. Bill, as amended, accordingly read the Third time, and passed.

829 830

PROHIBITION OF ANTI-PERSONNEL MINES BILL

. . Order for Second Reading read. .. . ( ... ) (The Hon. M.U.M. Ali Sabry) , " " .

. . , . , . Question put, and agreed to. Bill accordingly read a Second time.

.: '' .'' - [ .. . ]

. " ." - [ ... ]

Resolved: "That the Bill be referred to a Committee of the whole Parliament." - [The Hon. M.U.M. Ali Sabry]

. [ .] . [ .]

Considered in Committee. [THE HON. PRESIDING MEMBER in the Chair.]

1 10 .

1 10 .

Clauses 1 to 10 ordered to stand part of the Bill. 11 .-

11.- ( ) CLAUSE 11.- (Anti-personnel mine in private premises)

.. . ( ... ) (The Hon. M.U.M. Ali Sabry) , :

"5 , 1 20 ( ) :

'() , , ;' " .

. Amendment put, and agreed to.

11 .

11 .

Clause 11, as amended, ordered to stand part of the Bill.

12 21 .

12 21 .

Clauses 11 to 21 ordered to stand part of the Bill.

.

.

Preamble ordered to stand part of the Bill.

.

. .

. Enacting Clause and Title ordered to stand part of the Bill. Bill reported with Amendments.

.. . ( ... ) (The Hon. M.U.M. Ali Sabry) , " " .

, , , .

. .

, . , .

Question put, and agreed to. Bill, as amended, accordingly read the Third time, and passed.

()

JUDICATURE (AMENDMENT) BILL

. . Order for Second Reading read.

831 832

2022 10

.. . ( ... ) (The Hon. M.U.M. Ali Sabry) , " " .

. . , . , . Question put, and agreed to. Bill accordingly read a Second time.

.: '' .'' -[ .. . ] . " ." - [ ... ]

Resolved: "That the Bill be referred to a Committee of the whole Parliament." - [The Hon. M.U.M. Ali Sabry]

. [ .]

. [ .]

Considered in Committee. [THE HON. PRESIDING MEMBER in the Chair.]

1 3 .

1 3 .

Clauses 1 to 3 ordered to stand part of the Bill. .

.

.

.

Enacting Clause and Title ordered to stand part of the Bill. Bill reported without Amendments.

.. . ( ... ) (The Hon. M.U.M. Ali Sabry) , " " .

. .

, . , .

Question put, and agreed to. Bill accordingly read the Third time, and passed.

() CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL

. . Order for Second Reading read.

.. . ( ... ) (The Hon. M.U.M. Ali Sabry) , " " .

. . , . , . Question put, and agreed to. Bill accordingly read a Second time. .: '' .'' -[ .. . ]

. " ." - [ ... ]

Resolved: "That the Bill be referred to a Committee of the whole Parliament." - [The Hon. M.U.M. Ali Sabry]

. [ .] . [ .] Considered in Committee. [THE HON. PRESIDING MEMBER in the Chair.] 1 3 .

1 3 .

Clauses 1 to 3 ordered to stand part of the Bill.

.

. .

. Enacting Clause and Title ordered to stand part of the Bill. Bill reported without Amendments.

.. . ( ... ) (The Hon. M.U.M. Ali Sabry) , " " .

. .

, . , .

Question put, and agreed to. Bill accordingly read the Third time, and passed.

833 834

(

) () PROVINCIAL COUNCILS (TRANSFER OF STAMP

DUTY) (AMENDMENT) BILL . . Order for Second Reading read. ( ) (The Hon. Johnston Fernando) , " " .

. . , . , . Question put, and agreed to. Bill accordingly read a Second time. .: '' .'' -[ ]

. " ." - [ ]

Resolved: "That the Bill be referred to a Committee of the whole Parliament." - [The Hon. Johnston Fernando]

. [ .] . [ .]

Considered in Committee. [THE HON. PRESIDING MEMBER in the Chair.]

1 3 .

1 3 .

Clauses 1 to 3 ordered to stand part of the Bill. .

. .

. Enacting Clause and Title ordered to stand part of the Bill. Bill reported without Amendments. ( ) (The Hon. Johnston Fernando) , " " .

. .

, . , .

Question put, and agreed to. Bill accordingly read the Third time, and passed.

ADJOURNMENT

( ) (The Hon. Johnston Fernando) , " " .

. . Question proposed. ( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) . .

ADJOURNMENT QUESTIONS

( ) (The Hon. Nalin Bandara Jayamaha) , .

1. ?

2. ?

3. ?

4. ?

5. ?

6. ?

7. ?

8. ?

9. ?

10. ?

, . , 50, 55 . ? , 25 . 25

835 836

2022 10

. . . . , , , , , , , . . . , , , " " . . , . , . , , ; . , , , . .

, , 2019 2021 . . 14 . , , 20 , , 37; 4 . , . , 79 . , .

, 100 . . 100 ? ? ? ? ?

, . , , . . , 2 . , . . . .

.. ( .. - , , ) (The Hon. D.B. Herath - State Minister of Livestock, Farm Promotion and Dairy and Egg Related Industries) , , , , .

, . . , . 40,000 , . , . , . . , , 40,000 . , . , .

.

( ) (The Hon. Nalin Bandara Jayamaha) , ?

( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) , .

( ) (The Hon. Nalin Bandara Jayamaha) . , ; .

..

( .. ) (The Hon. D.B. Herath) . .

837 838

( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) , .

( ( ) ) (The Hon. (Dr.) Upul Galappaththi) , .

. , , . . , .

1. ?

2. 12.00 2.00 ?

3. ?

, .

4. ? , ?

. 2017 . , . , . , . 12.00 2.00 . , .

. 10, 15 7,000. , 7,000. , , 10 7,000 . , .

, . . rest area . .

, . . , , , 5,000 . , .

.. . ( .. - ) (The Hon. C.B. Rathnayake - Minister of Wildlife and Forest Conservation) , . , . . . . . . . . . . . , .

, - - . . , .

. , . .

839 840

2022 10

, . . .

, . 7,000 . 700. , , . , . . , . . . . .

. . . . . , . . . . , . .

( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) , . .. ( .. ) (The Hon.C.B. Rathnayake) , . , . . , ; .

. . "" . .

, .

1. .

i. .

ii. .

iii. .

iv. .

v. .

vi. .

vii. .

viii. , , .

ix. 01 03 - - .

x.

, .

xi.

.

xii.

.

xiii. 1

.

xiv.

.

841 842

02. 01

12.00 ..2.00 . . ( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) , . . 11 .

.. ( .. ) (The Hon.C.B. Rathnayake) Block 1, Block 2, Block 3, Block 4, Block 5 blocks . , .

, . .

* .

. : : Rest of the Answer tabled:

03.

. .

04.

. . . ( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) , , .

, . , 10 .

, 5 .

A PARLIAMENTARY SELECT COMMITTEE TO LOOK INTO

ISSUES OF PRISONS AND DETAINESS [.. 5.01

( ) (The Hon. Premalal Jayasekara) , :

" " " . , .

, , , , , .

, .

, ."

, . . , 199 . 20, 21 . 0, 90 , , . , ' ' . . . 300 . Rapid Antigen Test 2,000. , 14 PCR 6,000. HIV . X-ray . . 15, 20, 25

843 844

[ ..

2022 10

, . .

, . , , , .

* .

. , . . 21 . , 4, 5 . 15, 20 . . 5.30 cell 6.00 , . cells . . " " , .

, , . , .

, . . . .

( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) . .

[.. 5.07

( ) (The Hon. Sampath Athukorala) , .

. , , .. cell . cell 6.00 , . 20, 30 .

. . , . 11,000 . . , , . , , , . .

. .

, . ( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) . .

[.. 5.09]

( ) (The Hon. Shanakiyan Rajaputhiran Rasamanickam) , ! . . . . , , . ,

845 846

* . * . * Placed in the Library.

, , 20 - 40 .

, . . .. 15 . , ? . , , ? .

soap , toilet , . , . . ? soap ; . ; . .

( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) , .

( ) (The Hon. Shanakiyan Rajaputhiran Rasamanickam) . '' . . ? . , ? . , soap, . .

. . . .. ? ? .

( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) , . .

( ) (The Hon. Shanakiyan Rajaputhiran Rasamanickam) , . , ?

Sir, I would like to quote a headline of an article I saw on a website called "Groundviews".

Living in Hell: The Plight of Prisoners Held Under the PTA

I do not want to take any more time, Sir. , how prisoners have been tortured in prison, asking for a confession under the PTA.

( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) , .

( ) (The Hon. Shanakiyan Rajaputhiran Rasamanickam) Due to not having enough time, Sir, I will table* all these news articles I have here with me.

Hon. Minister, I would expect a reply from you, as to what the situation is with regard to the prisoners who were attacked in Anuradhapura and also Badulla Prisons. Today, under this Adjournment Motion, we are talking about the welfare of prisoners. But, I am talking about the remand prisoners who have been sleeping peacefully in prison cells till they are convicted; they are not even convicts yet, but they have been held in remand. But now, they cannot even sleep peacefully without being attacked - they had once been attacked by the former Minister - by their inmates.

Thank you.

( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) . . 2 .

847 848

[

* . * . * Placed in the Library.

2022 10

[.. 5.13

. ( . ) (The Hon. Premnath C. Dolawatte) , .

, . , ; . , , . , . . . . .

, .

( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) , .

. ( . ) (The Hon. Premnath C. Dolawatte) , .

( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) 3 , .

. ( . ) (The Hon. Premnath C. Dolawatte) , . . . . . . , . , . , . ,

, . . - , - .

.

( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) . 4 .

[.. 5.16

( ) (The Hon. Nalin Bandara Jayamaha) , . , . , - .

. , . .

, , 70 . 10, 15, 20, 30, 40 . , , , 70 . , 10 .

, , . . , , . . . , , . , , . . 70 90 . 71 ; 72 ; 75, 0 . . . . , , . , .

849 850

, " , " . , , , .

, . . . . 12, 13 . , . . , . .

. ( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) . .

[.. 5.20

( ) (The Hon. Samanpriya Herath)

, . . . . . . . , 25 . , 55, 60 . ' ' . . . . . , , .

. , . . .

. . , . . , , , , .

( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) . .

[.. 5.22 ( ) (The Hon. Chaminda Wijesiri) , .

, . , , . , , . , . , . , , . .

, , . , , . . 64 . 64 . , . . . . , , . , , . . .

851 852

[

2022 10

, .

, , , . . . . , , . . . .

, . , , , .

. [.. 5.26

( ) (The Hon. Weerasumana Weerasinghe) , , , , .

, , , , . , . , . , , . , , .

, , . , . , .

, .

- .

, , , , , .

( ) (The Hon. Presiding Member) . 4 .

[.. 5.29

.. . ( ... - ) (The Hon. M.U.M. Ali Sabry - Minister of Justice) , 4 . .

, . .

. 2019 32,200 . 1 ,500 , . ,000 .

, interest . , , . . , . . . , , , , . .

, 250 . , , . , .

853 854

2021 2025 "A Right Based Correctional System for a Safer Society" system . , , , , , , , "- " .

e-visit . , Internet e-visit . Skype App . . 00 . 2,000 . 500 .

, open-prison camp , open-prison camps 2,000 . . . , ,000 . 1,500. , . , . . * .

, . , appeal , appeal - - . , 10 appeal 3 , appeal 10 . , 13 .

. , . , . . . - - , , . gadget use . . .

.

. . .30 .

. . .34 2022 11 . . 10.00 .

.. 5.30 , .

, .. 5.34, 2022 11, .. 10.00 .

And it being past 5.30 p.m., THE HON. PRESIDING MEMBER adjourned Parliament without Question put.

Parliament adjourned accordingly at 5.34 p.m. until 10.00 a.m. on Friday, 11th February, 2022.

855 856

[ ...

* . * . * Placed in the Library.

..

,

.

.

NOTE

Corrections which Members suggest for the Final Print of their speeches should be clearly marked in their copy and

sent to the Editor of HANSARD within two weeks of receipt of the uncorrected copy.

Contents of Proceedings : Final set of manuscripts Received from Parliament : Printed copies dispatched :

163

.

www.parliament.lk

.

. 163, , , 5

.

www.parliament.lk

.

Hansard Reports can be purchased from the Government Publications Bureau

at the Department of Government Information, No. 163, Kirulapone Avenue, Polhengoda, Colombo 5.

This Hansard Report can be downloaded from

www.parliament.lk

.